In this lab, we'll have a look at Equal Cost Multi Path (ECMP) with a lab
demo. Now, to start it off, I'll use the same lab again where it's Unequal Cost Paths. So we've got the topology
with R4 going down to R1 in the 10.0.1.0/24 network is behind
R1. And R4 can get there either via R3 or via R5 and what I've done in the lab
already, I've configured all the IP addresses and I've configured RIP on all the routers as well. So to
get to the routes behind R1, R4 is going to go via R5 because it's got a lower hop
count. It's only two hops via R5, it's three hops via R3.
So let's have a look at that in the lab, and if I do a 'show ip route' on R1, I'm sure that's going to
show my routes going back to R4. Let's have a look at R4 going to R1 so I just 'show ip
route' there and I can see my route for 10.0.1.0
is going to go via 10.1.3.2, which is on R5 and I've only got one route to get to
10.0.1.0 because it's a best path. It's better than the route
going through R3.
Okay,
so that's what happens when we've got this lab topology with Unequal Cost Paths.
What happens if I change the lab topology with Equal Costs? So what I'm going to do is I'm going to
reconfigure the lab, I'm going to put in R6 in here.
So that way, it's going to be three hops whether we go via R3 or go via R5.
Now, at first, I'm going to leave the links on R5 as 10 megabits compared to 100 megabits fastEthernet on all of the
other links. And you're going to see the difference that it makes whether we're using RIP or OSPF.
So I'll go and reconfigure the lab
now, I'll see you back here in a second.
Okay,
I'm back again
and if we have a look at the old config you'll see that R5 was directly attached to R1 with
its fastEthernet3/0 interface.
What I've done is I put in R6 in there. So fastEthernet3/0 in R5 is now connected to R6,
and I've changed the subnet. I've made that a 10.1.4.0/24 subnet and R6, its fastEthernet3/0
interface is now got the IP address 10.0.3.2 that used to be
on R5. I still have the links on R5 as 10 megabits per second, the links everywhere else are
100 megabits. So, let's just check the differences that I made in the configuration. If we have a look
at R5, you see I've just changed the IP address on that link to R6. I've put it in the subnet
10.1.4.0 and on R6, I have configured it's IP address on fastEthernet0/0 going
back to R5, and I've configured RIP on there. I cannot just see I forgot to do something, I also
need to go interface fastEthernet3/0 which is connected to R1 and it's going to get
IP address 10.0.3.2 with a /24. That's the IP address that used to be on R5, and do
a 'no shut' on here.
Okay, let's just check that RIP is running everywhere.
So there are 'show ip route' on R6, it might take a minute for RIP to run on here.
Okay, there we go. So there's our RIP routes showing up. So now if we go and have a look on R4, before,
R4 just had that one route to the 10.0.1.0 network behind R1. Also, for the 10.0.2.0 network
behind R1 as well, but I can see it there, so 10.0.1.0 and 10.0.2.0
which is one route which is going out fastEthernet2/0 interface because it was the best
route going down that bottom route via R5. But because I've made those changes now, both the top and
the bottom path are Equal Cost. They've both got the same hop count which is going to be three hops. So if I
do a 'show ip route' now, the routing protocol should have converged right now and it hasn't yet
I can see that I've still got one route.
Okay, you know what I'll do to
speed things up is I will do a 'no router rip' to disable RIP, and then, I'll enable it again. So I'll say
'router rip',
and it was for network 10.0.0.0 and let's see if that speed things up a bit.
I'll do 'show ip route' and there's the difference now. I can see that for the 10.0.1.0 network
is now going to go via two paths, 10.1.3.2, which is on R5 and 10.1.1.2,
which is on R3.
So, it's going to load balance via both of those routers.
Also, I'm going to do it for the 10.0.2.0 network which is also behind R1 on the right.
Okay, so that just configured Equal Cost Multi Path for RIP.
Let's see what happens if we enable OSPF on here now.
So I'll go to my text file again, and I'll paste in a basic config for OSPF.
I'll do that on all of my routers.
Actually, let me just put it in a 'config t' in front of here to save me typing that every time.
Okay, so I'll copy this and paste that in on every router, so that's R1, R2, R3, R4,
R5, and R6. And let's see if it's converged yet or not.
So back on R4, I'll do a 'show ip route' and I should see the RIP routes being replaced with OSPF
routes, and
just come up now on R4. Again, you'll see it does take the routing protocol a little bit of time to converge
and there's the other neighbor,
so if I do a 'show ip route on here
now,
I can see that my RIP routes have been replaced with OSPF routes.
You saw for RIP, I had two Equal Cost Paths going through
both R3 and R5 but OSPF just put one route into the routing table for the 10.0.1.0
and the 10.0.2.0 networks.
So, why is that happening?
Well, if I go back to the topology diagram, you'll see that the links on either side of R5 are 10
megabits, the links along with top path are 100 megabits.
So, these were Equal Cost when it was with RIP because it just looks at hop count but OSPF takes bandwidth
into account.
So the top path is the better path here
that's why it's the one that was installed into the routing table.
So if I want to get Equal Cost Multi Path here, what I can do is go onto R5 and make those links
100 megabits per second as well.
So let's just check what interfaces they were on, I'll do a 'show ip interface brief', they're on fastEthernet2/0
and fastEthernet3/0.
So I go to global configuration, 'interface fastEthernet2/0',
and just to check the correct command, I can do a 'do show run interface fastEthernet2/0'.
And I want to do a 'no',
and then in my client here, I can just select the bandwidth, right click, and it will paste that in.
So that's going to remove that manually configured bandwidth and it's going to set it back to the
default bandwidth of 100 megabits per second.
So I need to do that on fastEthernet2/0 and also on interface fastEthernet3/0, and
I'll put the command in there as well and I need to do that on the other sides of the link as well. So
I'll go over to R4, do a 'config t', and it's on interface fastEthernet2/0 on this side.
Now, let's just double check it.
So I'll do a 'do show run interface fastEthernet2/0', and
I can see I've got the lower bandwidth configured there as well, so I'll remove that command to set it back
to the default. And also on R6,
this is on interface fastEthernet0/0.
So I'll 'do show a run interface fastEthernet0/0.' And
I can see the lower bandwidth was configured there as well.
I'll remove it there too. I'm on the wrong prompt there,
so I need to go 'interface fastEthernet0/0', and I'll try that again.
And there we go,
we're done.
Okay.
So again, we might need to give this a little bit of time to converge.
But if I go into R4 now, so before,
it just had that one route going to the routes behind R1.
If we try a 'show ip route' now.
Yeah, we can see it's converged already.
So now, because it's two Equal Cost Paths, to get to 10.0.1.0/24, it can go via 10.1.3.2,
which is on R5, or 10.1.1.2, which is on R3. And also for
10.0.2.0/24
also behind R1, it's going to load balance the traffic over those two different paths as well.
Okay,
so that was a demonstration of our Equal Cost Multi Pathing.
See you in the next lecture.